January 2022 newsletter draft (#357)
fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org: _posts/2022-01-01-Fortran-Newsletter-January-2022.md

in [this repository](https://github.com/MarDiehl/stdlib_os).
Please try it out and let us know how it works, if there are any issues, or if the API can be improved.

## Fortran Package Manager

Here's what's new in fpm:

* [#634](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/634):
  Better extraction of the Fortran compiler from the MPI wrapper

### Work in progress

* [#642](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/642) (WIP):
  Replace polymorphic assignment with move_alloc
* [#630](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/630) (WIP):
  just allow . on new subcommand instead of changing canonical path pro…
* [#622](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/622) (WIP):
  Cleanup the backend output
* [#608](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/608) (WIP):
  --env switch lets you specify the prefix of the compiler-related environment variables
* [#539](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/539) (WIP):
  Add parent packages into dependency tree
* [#498](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/498) (WIP):
  Compiler flags profiles

`fpm` is still in early development and we need as much help as we can get.
Here's how you can help today:

> * Use it and let us know what you think! Read the [fpm packaging guide](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/blob/main/PACKAGING.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use it and let us know what you think! Read the [fpm packaging guide](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/en/tutorial)
```

> to learn how to build your package with fpm, and the [manifest reference](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/blob/main/manifest-reference.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to learn how to build your package with fpm, and the [manifest reference](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/en/spec/manifest.html)
```

## Compilers

### Flang

TODO @AlexisPerry

### LFortran

TODO @certik

We are looking for new contributors. Please do not hesitate to contact us if
you are interested. We will help you get up to speed.

## Events

* We had our 21st Fortran Monthly call on December 14.
  You can watch the recording below:
  <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/NSvL2yrefH8" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
* We also wrote a review of the Fortran-lang projects in 2021. Read it
  [here]({{ site.baseurl }}/newsletter/2021/12/29/Fortran-lang-2021-in-review/).

As usual, subscribe to the [mailing list](https://groups.io/g/fortran-lang) and/or
join the [Discourse](https://fortran-lang.discourse.group) to stay tuned with the future meetings.

## Contributors

We thank everybody who contributed to fortran-lang in the past month by
commenting in any of these repositories:

* [fortran-lang/stdlib](https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib)
* [fortran-lang/stdlib-cmake-example](https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib-cmake-example)
* [fortran-lang/fpm](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm)

> * [fortran-lang/fpm-registry](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm-registry)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [fortran-lang/fpm-registry](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm-registry)
* [fortran-lang/fpm-docs](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm-docs)
```

---
layout: post
title: "Fortran newsletter: January 2022"
category: newsletter

> author: Milan Curcic

Author: ```suggestion
author: Milan Curcic, Sebastian Ehlert, Jérémie Vandenplas
```

---

Happy New Year and welcome to the January 2022 edition of the monthly Fortran 
newsletter.
The newsletter comes out at the beginning of every month and details
Fortran news from the previous month.

<ul id="page-nav"></ul>

## fortran-lang.org

Here's what's new and ongoing in the fortran-lang.org repo:

* [#349](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org/pull/349):
  Newsletter draft for December 2021
* [#350](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org/pull/350):
  Updated CaNS item so that it shows the version
* [#353](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org/pull/353):
  Add MCST LCC C, C++ and Fortran compiler
* [#351](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org/pull/351):
  Use HEAD to reference default branch
* [#355](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org/pull/355):
  2021 review article draft

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#356](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org/pull/356) (WIP):
  Adding Fortran Error Handler to packages index

```

### Work in progress

> * [#356](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org/pull/356) (WIP):
>   Adding Fortran Error Handler to packages index

Reviewer 2: I believe that it has been merged.
```suggestion
```

* [#276](https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib/pull/276) (WIP):
  Probability Distribution and Statistical Functions -- Exponential Distribution Module
* [#189](https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib/pull/189) (WIP):
  Initial implementation of COO / CSR sparse format

Please help improve stdlib by testing and [reviewing pull requests](https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib/issues?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22reviewers+needed%22)!

The candidate for file system operations to be included in stdlib is being developed by
[@MarDiehl](https://github.com/MarDiehl) and [@arjenmarkus](https://github.com/arjenmarkus)
in [this repository](https://github.com/MarDiehl/stdlib_os).
Please try it out and let us know how it works, if there are any issues, or if the API can be improved.

## Fortran Package Manager

Here's what's new in fpm:

* [#634](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/634):
  Better extraction of the Fortran compiler from the MPI wrapper

### Work in progress

* [#642](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/642) (WIP):
  Replace polymorphic assignment with move_alloc
* [#630](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/pull/630) (WIP):

>   just allow . on new subcommand instead of changing canonical path pro…

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  allow backfilling of current directory in new subcommand
```

to learn how to build your package with fpm, and the [manifest reference](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/en/spec/manifest.html)
to learn what are all the things that you can specify in the fpm.toml file.

* Browse existing *fpm* packages on the [fortran-lang website](https://fortran-lang.org/packages/fpm)
* Browse the [open issues](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm/issues) and see if you can help implement any fixes or features.
* Adapt your Fortran package for fpm and submit it to the [Registry](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm-registry).
* Improve the documentation.

The short-term goal of fpm is to make development and installation of Fortran packages with dependencies easier.
Its long term goal is to build a rich and decentralized ecosystem of Fortran packages and create a healthy
environment in which new open source Fortran projects are created and published with ease.

## Compilers

### Flang

TODO @AlexisPerry

### LFortran

TODO @certik

We are looking for new contributors. Please do not hesitate to contact us if
you are interested. We will help you get up to speed.

## Events

> 

Author: I forgot about fpm-docs. I think we should also mention it under Events.

```suggestion

* fpm has a new documentation website hosted at
  [fpm.fortran-lang.org](https://fpm.fortran-lang.org/).
  This website will provide user-oriented tutorials and how-to guides, as well
  as developer-oriented reference documents and specifications.
  We welcome all contributions to the fpm documentation, including translations
  to other languages.
  Please visit the [fpm-docs repo](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm-docs) to
  get started.
```

As usual, subscribe to the [mailing list](https://groups.io/g/fortran-lang) and/or
join the [Discourse](https://fortran-lang.discourse.group) to stay tuned with the future meetings.

## Contributors

We thank everybody who contributed to fortran-lang in the past month by
commenting in any of these repositories:

* [fortran-lang/stdlib](https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib)
* [fortran-lang/stdlib-cmake-example](https://github.com/fortran-lang/stdlib-cmake-example)
* [fortran-lang/fpm](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm)
* [fortran-lang/fpm-registry](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm-registry)
* [fortran-lang/fpm-docs](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm-docs)
* [fortran-lang/setup-fpm](https://github.com/fortran-lang/setup-fpm)
* [fortran-lang/fpm-haskell](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm-haskell)
* [fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-lang.org)
* [fortran-lang/benchmarks](https://github.com/fortran-lang/benchmarks)
* [fortran-lang/fortran-forum-article-template](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fortran-forum-article-template)
* [fortran-lang/fftpack](https://github.com/fortran-lang/fftpack)

> * [j3-fortran/fortran\_proposals](https://github.com/j3-fortran/fortran_proposals)

Reviewer 2: Should `testdrive` be in this list?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [fortran-lang/test-drive)[https://github.com/fortran-lang/test-drive)
* [j3-fortran/fortran\_proposals](https://github.com/j3-fortran/fortran_proposals)
```

---
layout: post
title: "Fortran newsletter: January 2022"
category: newsletter

> author: Milan Curcic, Sebastian Ehlert, Jérémie Vandenplas, Alexis Perry-Holby

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
author: Milan Curcic, Sebastian Ehlert, Jérémie Vandenplas, Alexis Perry-Holby, Ondřej Čertík
```

* Fix INQUIRE(PAD=) and (POSITION=) for predefined units
* Add a semantics test for co_sum
* Fix off-by-one results from folding MAXEXPONENT and MINEXPONENT
* Skip `Fortran STOP:` before message when NO_STOP_MESSAGE is set
* Fix printing of constc and parsing of  #fir.real
* Predefine unit 0 connected to stderr
* Add -fno-automatic, refine IsSaved()
* Correct the argument keyword for AIMAG(Z=...)
* Inclusive language: remove instances of master
* Return true in IsSymplyContiguous for allocatables
* Fix usage & catch errors for MAX/MIN with keyword= arguments
* Re-fold bounds expressions in DATA implied DO loops
* Correct INQUIRE(POSITION= & PAD=)
* Rearrange prototype & code placement of IsCoarray()    
* Replace notifyMatchFailure with TODO hard failures
* TargetRewrite: Rewrite fir.address_of(func)
* Fix folding of EXPONENT() intrinsic function
* OPEN(RECL=) handling for sequential formatted I/O
* Avoid potential deadlock in CloseAll()

Call notes are recorded and available upon request [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10T-S2J3GrahpG4Ooif93NSTz2zBW0MQc_RlwHi0-afY). Please contact Alexis Perry-Holby at aperry@lanl.gov for document access.

### LFortran

> TODO @certik

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Beginning of refactoring of ASR (Abstract Semantic Representation) into a standalone library
* New intrinsics: mvbits, bge, bgt, ble, blt, ibits
* generic procedure resolution fixes
* FreeBSD fixes
* Implement `.xor.` (LFortran as well as GFortran extension)
* Fixes to large integers (BigInt) handling
* Added support for `private`, `final` attributes in derived types/classes

The following people contributed code in December 2021: Ondřej Čertík, Gagandeep Singh, Harris Snyder
```
